Will, welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
It's great to talk with you.
Thank you. It's good to be here again.
Yeah. It's going to be really fun.
I've built some really cool apps with Rich,
and we're going to talk about Rich and Textual.
Probably a little more on the textual side this time around,
but still, a very cool revolution you're bringing to the terminal.
Yeah, a very quiet but pretty revolution.
I like it.
Indeed.
Okay, so we want to talk about Textual.
You wrote a cool article called Algorithms for High Performance Terminal Apps,
which I thought would be fun to dive in,
but we're going to also keep it more of a broad-ranging conversation.
At the start of all that, you know,
it's been a little while since I've had you on the show.
I'm going to tell people who maybe haven't listened to that episode or episodes
Who you are.
Sure, my name is Wilma Guggen.
I'm a software developer, Python developer, probably like most of your listeners.
I achieved a certain amount of infamy when I built this library called Rich, which a lot of people use.
If you see some fancy output in your terminal, that might have been me.
And I founded a startup called Textualize,
which is all about improving
the developer experience in the terminal.
And I'm sure we'll discuss Textual,
which is my other Python library in this show.
Yeah, absolutely. I'm super excited for it.
And is this close to the one-year anniversary for Textual?
Is that? It was an anniversary of some sort,
because we're going to talk about one of your articles.
It's actually closer to three years since I founded Textualize.
Oh no, you know, it's not, it's the 1.0 milestone.
Oh right, yeah.
1.0 year, the 1.0 version.
There we go.
That's what I was thinking.
Yeah, so Textual follows Semver, which I imagine people are familiar with.
When you're on the zero version, you have a bit of flexibility and you can make breaking changes.
We try not to, but you can make breaking changes and it gives you a bit of freedom.
early on to play around with things.
But some people stick to zero ver just forever,
which is fine if that's what you do.
But when you go to 1.0, it advertises to people that this is stable.
You can rely on the interface not changing too quickly.
And if there are any changes, it's well documented.
So if you fold along, it's a very modest release from the last zero version to the 1.0 version.
But it says to the world, hey, we think Textionalized is ready.
You can start using it in production, even though you could probably have been using it in production for a year.
I'm sure that you could have. I'm sure you could have.
Are you familiar with zerover.org, the numeral zero, V-E-R.O-R-G?
Have you seen this?
No, I didn't.
I thought it was just an aspect of Semver.
I didn't realize it was.
It is absolutely an aspect of Semver.
But this, I can't remember who put this together.
Does it say at the bottom?
Let's see about the about page.
Publish.
Yeah, that's what I thought.
I thought it was Mahmoud Hashemi.
Amazing.
Yeah.
So Mahmoud put this together.
And basically it calls out, I think it's a little contrarian to,
you know there's a lot of especially larger companies that have rules about what version
you're allowed to use and is software ready enough if it's a 0.3 we can't use it it's not ready
not until it's a 1.0 or a 2.0 or something along those lines right and so this is
the the popular popular projects that are still really really low in their versions
It says, welcome December 0.0.1.
And if you go down here, it says, look, React Native is 0.78, even though it's 10 years old.
Hugo, which I use for my blog and love it, it's got 77,000 GitHub stars.
It was first released 12 years ago.
Yeah, more than a decade long.
It's still 0.something.
Let's see if there's some that are really extreme.
I think the problem is that non-software developers have a different idea what versions mean.
Yes, I know.
We know that they're for about compatibility.
But when you're marketing it, 1.0 is like you advertise it, you make a splash about it.
That's when it's actually out. You can use it. The other one is just like a toy, right?
And then boom, 2.0.
Yeah, let's see.
neo vim 0.10 scikit-learn it's 15 years old it's 0.17 but so i think i totally hear what you're
saying right about like yes this and i think we both agree like what this should mean if your thing
is 0.17 probably that means there's a good chance that there might be some adaptations to the api
At the same time, if you're scikit-learn and you've been around for 15 years,
it might be time to bump that to something over 0.17.
You know what I mean?
What do you think?
I think it's the developer-led projects,
the ones which are just a bunch of developers releasing open source.
We developers don't like to make too much promises.
Exactly.
If we were to put a 1.0 on it.
Who's going to be on the hook for making that 1.0
and then they're stuck with it, right?
Exactly.
We know that 1.0 is not going to be perfect and bug-free.
So we don't necessarily want to be on the hook for it not being perfect.
Yeah, I know.
At the same time, you're on the hook to not change scikit-learn at this point anyway.
You know what I mean?
And I'm only picking on them because I know they're so well-loved in the community,
and they're very, very common.
Unlike, say, Ruff, which is on this list, but Ruff is pretty new.
Anyway, I think I'll put this in the show notes.
ZeroVer.
Thanks, David.
That was really fun.
So let's talk about terminals.
Terminal revolution.
I think it's a pretty interesting time for terminals.
Both the application that runs your terminal as well as closer to what you're doing,
building applications that are like CLI apps or TUI apps,
as we'll coin the term.
No, you've coined the term.
We'll tell people about the term if they don't know, right?
I mean, we've got Warp.
We've got Ghostity.
I don't know how you say Ghostity, whatever.
A bunch of other options coming along for terminals
that make being in the terminal nicer
and I think also draw people into wanting to build apps
that run in that space rather than try to get away from it, right?
It's not macOS where it's just the default Z shell
with no history and it's like white with weird fonts
or CMD on Windows where you're like,
what is this thing, you know?
What are your thoughts on this?
First of all, like maybe just on the apps that run,
do you have a favorite terminal app that you run?
I've been using iTerm for the last few years.
It's kind of my daily driver.
But there's a few other good ones.
There's Alacrity and Kitty and then GhostTTY or GhostTTY.
I'm not sure.
That's a new kid on the block.
It is a new kid on the block.
And it is very good.
It is very good indeed.
But I like iTerm's feature set.
It's not the fastest, but it's fairly reliable.
And it's got lots of other features.
Do you...
I played around with...
Yeah, sorry, Guy.
I played around with warp.dev as well.
I think that's a little too unconventional for me at the moment.
They've done some very cool stuff, though.
So, yeah, there's lots of innovation there.
It is really, it takes some good news to you.
That's the one I've been using last year or so,
and I really, really enjoyed it.
It does very cool things, like, for example,
if I'm on my computer, and then I SSH into another computer,
And then in that computer, I Docker exec something into a Docker system, a Docker container.
Warp will say, would you like to apply the warp shell to this Docker container instead of whatever essay?
It might not even have bash, right?
It might just be essay.
So you just hit a button and it goes, whoop.
It adapts and basically become kind of like in memory installs itself into that container temporarily, right?
That sets all the settings and stuff.
So it's a long ways from cmd.exe.
I guess it's worth putting out to people out there on Windows,
if you're not using Windows Terminal, please.
Right?
You need to use Windows Terminal.
It's such an improvement over...
Massive improvement.
Right?
I mean, you probably run into this all the time, right?
Yeah.
I know the solution.
If someone tries something in the terminal,
uses retro textual and it doesn't work properly um i first say um have you tried downloading
windows terminal and 99 of the time uh it not only fixes it but it makes it look look beautiful
i mean hats off to microsoft um they didn't change the terminal for decades but when they
did they made a very good job of it yeah it took a while i i don't know if it's the default
yet. You know what I mean? I'm not sure what's actually presented if you kind of pull up the
start menu. It's a very strange architecture. You can pull up cmd.exe. That's what I've been used
to calling it because it has it in the title bar. If you send it some magic codes, you can switch it
into essentially Windows terminal. It'll process escape sequences like it does on Mac.
and Linux.
So the actual window you see
is just kind of like
a window onto the
thing which renders the terminal.
So you can get
Windows, you might already have Windows
terminal even if you don't
get the experience, but software
can switch it into this mode
which makes it work
really well. I had no idea.
That's cool. Yeah.
It's probably the same core
for both of them or something, right?
Yeah, exactly. The architecture is very component based and you can switch it at runtime.
Yeah, that sounds very Microsoft.
Yeah.
Is there a code that you can put to embed?
Like if you can split the panes and then you can embed Excel on one side maybe?
And then SharePoint on the other?
I haven't found it.
I'm just kidding.
I feel like that's something I can do.
I wouldn't be surprised.
I wouldn't either.
Are you a fan of modifying your shell, I guess?
You know, like, oh, my ZSH or oh, my posh or Starship or any of these?
Yeah, to change the prompt.
Yeah, I do have, I can't remember which one I use now.
It's not, is it Starship?
Yeah.
Yeah, it's fairly minimal.
It tells me the branch, the Git branch I'm working on,
the version of Python that's running.
and the version of the application I'm working on.
So that's really nice.
Oh, it'll tell you the version of the application you're working on?
Yeah, it says v1.0.0,
so it's somehow pulled out the version from Textual, I guess.
Oh, wow. That's pretty cool.
I guess if it's in a repo and it knows that repo is a package,
it can figure out what version it is, but that's still pretty neat.
I guess. It must go in the spec.
PyProject.toml, I'm guessing.
Yeah.
Yeah, I don't know. It's magic and it works.
So don't delve too deeply.
Yeah, the whole reason I'm bringing this up,
it might feel like a little bit of a diversion,
but when people think about terminal apps
and just being in the terminal and somebody says,
oh, God, I hate the terminal.
It's so bad. I can't stand it.
It usually means they're not adopting
some of these really magical tools,
regardless of which one regardless of whether you adopt starship or oh my zsh or warp or whatever
you get a dramatically different experience right yeah it's uh infinitely customizable um the
terminal and the shell and various other software um so you can get the kind of experience that you
want out of a terminal people get very comfortable uh with their terminal environment um it feels
like it feels like um an old pair of shoes you know it's just it's just uh that comfortable
i guess it depends what tools you use as well for example if you're a neo vim or an emacs type
person you're in the terminal even way way more than say for me for example use PyCharm and other
tools that yeah you know i only dip in and out when you know when i'm working on code for that
kind of stuff yeah for me i'm switching between terminal and vs code most of most of the day so
i've got both open i write some code and i switch back to terminal and run said code so i i'm i'm in
both um yeah but i know funnily enough i never got into editors that run inside the terminal um i do
like all the fancy graphics that vs code can give you that terminal couldn't um yeah that matters
less to other people but you know what when i when i started out doing programming i started out
doing a lot of work on silicon graphics mainframes doing emacs on onyx workstations and stuff like
that and i was happy as a clam to get out of there as quick as possible to get out of i'm like can i
I get some better tools than this. And yeah, I don't know. I, I, I'm on the GUI side as well, but
I feel like kind of, kind of like the terminal, if you don't customize your terminal, it's not
a great experience. If you don't really can commit to learning all the hotkeys of your GUI app,
well, it feels like, well, I gotta use this mouse at all clunky, but like, I almost never use the
mouse. You know what I mean? Even though I'm in a GUI app, right? They just customize the hotkeys.
I think you can get very proficient in both.
You know, I've seen people using a terminal and they use Emacs or Vim
and their fingers just fly through it and they're very proficient.
But the same thing in VS Code.
If you know your editor and you know the shortcut keys
and you don't reach for the mouse very often,
you can be just as proficient, really.
At Textualize, we had a policy if you use whatever you want to use
to edit code.
Because if you take a developer who uses Vim
and then force them to use code,
they will not be happy.
And they will not be as efficient at all.
Yeah, that's a really tricky balance, right?
You want to let people work where they're comfortable, for sure.
Yeah.
All right, well, I think that's a good transition to TUI.
What are TUIs?
Why do people build them?
I know we talked about this in the last episode.
We won't totally necessarily rehash it,
but there are some, if people haven't seen it,
there are some incredible applications.
And we will see some built-in textual
that run in the terminal.
Yeah, sure.
So TUI stands for text-use interface.
I don't actually like that term anymore.
Okay.
What would you like?
Well, the thing is,
the two is that you build the textual are also GUIs.
It's a very simplified form of graphics, but we've got,
you've got lines and, and corners and you've got like a mouse that you can move around.
So it is rounded with text, but it works just like a GUI.
So I guess it's like a little bit like saying a web browser is a document based UI.
Yeah.
And we're having this whole video live stream recording across the internet, across the world in a web browser.
And there's only a little text on the screen, right?
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
So the term tree is stuck, but it's just, it's a GUI that runs in your terminal.
Well, I think originally it was pretty text based.
The advanced version might be a progress bar, right?
Or emojis or color.
Yeah, exactly.
So those are technically text, but it looks like images.
So you've got emoji, you can have lots of,
like I'm looking at my starship prompt
and it's got like a snake 'cause it's in Python.
That kind of stuff.
That is technically text, but it is graphical.
And progress bars, you create a bar using characters,
but essentially you're creating an image.
So I think the distinction between like text user interface
and graphical user interface is fuzzy now.
If you say Tui, I'll know what you're talking about,
but I just don't like the term.
I don't think it's as clear.
I'm not sure that we even need the distinction.
- Yeah, I hear you.
Are you familiar with BTOP?
Have you seen this app?
- Yeah, that's really, really pretty.
I like the fading effect.
- I mean, this app has just crazy amounts of
graphics and it's all written in the terminal with live updating i don't know how many graphs but
many many graphs interesting thing about btop um i think most people who run it don't run it because
they really need to keep an eye on the performance of their course and and file system etc um i think
a lot of them run it because it's got it's retro cool it's right cool it looks cool it looks like
uh how you thought computers were gonna look uh i'm gonna be a programmer and hacker i'm gonna be
a super tech guy this yeah you know what it could be this could be a movie UI you know how when you're
watching a movie they're like they for whatever reason won't run mac os or windows they come up
with some you know weird variation that's got weird graphics and have some dialogue like
excuse i've got to hack the gibson okay done exactly did it put up something oh my god this
is visual basic i know visual basic i'm gonna get his ip address it's like what yeah no no oh boy
anyway i think just you know this is a really really cool example of of pushing way way way
beyond this is a google this is a graphical user interface this is not a textual user interface
right exactly i mean it technically is tags but it's it's not graphical yeah yeah yeah so we have
So we have two things that you guys make.
We've got textual and rich, and maybe it's worth talking about rich for a moment since
that's the foundation.
Sure.
Okay.
So rich basically formats data in a very pleasing to the eye way.
You can print say a Python dict and it'll format with an indentation and it'll colorize strings
and things.
And you can print things like tables quite effortlessly, syntax highlighted code, and
you can use up to 16.7 million colors.
Wow.
Essentially it was a toolkit to prettify terminal output with as little effort as possible.
And it's all kind of integrated.
So you can put syntax-highlighted text inside a table or a progress bar inside a cell.
And everything kind of works together.
So it's a single coherent system.
Because some of this stuff existed prior to Rich.
But they were written by different authors.
And they weren't designed to work together.
Maybe there's a table one by one person and then a progress bar by another.
And they didn't really work the same or integrate or things like that.
Yeah, exactly. Exactly.
So it meant that terminal output was still quite basic.
When color was used, it would colorize a single line or something like that.
And it still it helped, but it wasn't great for parsing visually
parsing that information.
But Rich gave you that ability that when you write output, it is readable.
I think prior to that, we developers kind of built up this skill of staring at monochrome
text with funny characters and numbers and somehow pulling out meaningful information
out of that.
And it took years to develop, but hopefully now we don't need to, you know, because you
can write things to the terminal that looks much like the output you'd get in a browser.
It's formatted and readable and colourful.
Yeah. You know, one thing that might be worth talking about is the live updates.
Like live tables and stuff.
Yes. So in RIT you can create a live object. That's what the class is called.
And basically it clears the screen and it writes that output and then you can refresh it.
It can do that quickly, like 20 times a second or less, depending on how much data you've
got.
So you can create animations, you can create dashboards, you can create like a scrolling
list of text.
But it was kind of, it was limited.
All it could do is update information regularly.
It wasn't interactive.
couldn't click or scroll or even detect key presses.
It was purely for updating information.
It's like a very rudimentary predecessor of textual.
Another thing that's interesting is,
what's the frame rate of a terminal?
People think of it just scrolling text and printing out text,
and you see it going by and you're like,
yeah, well, that's kind of how the UIs must be.
But you can actually push these things pretty far, right?
You can.
Interesting thing is I don't think anyone who sat down to develop a terminal
was thinking in terms of frames per second.
You know, they were just, they want to optimize the text output
so that if you cut a large file, it didn't take forever to scroll through.
- Right, or didn't flicker around or something.
- Yeah, yeah, and later on people like myself and others
were creating animations and things,
and they're thinking, "Well, how fast can I push this?"
And it turns out pretty fast,
'cause terminals use your GPU to render the text,
and if you send it text fast enough, it'll keep up, mostly.
And I found that 60 frames a second is completely workable on most terminals.
You don't really need that for most apps because if you're scrolling text,
you can only move character at a time.
It's not pixel perfect because it's kind of like a grid.
So if you want to scroll at 60 frames a second,
you'd have to move 60 lines in a second,
Which text will just kind of whiz by.
Yeah, it gets blurry anyway.
Yeah, so it can do 60 frames a second, which is sometimes fun for animation effects.
But generally, you don't need it.
You know, you can update 10 frames a second and it'll look nice and smooth.
But it's nice to know that you can.
We've got a ridiculous demo which creates a really colorful gradient and then rotates it at 60 frames a second.
wow and it looks very cool it would be a terrible in an actual app because it just burned your
retina um but it is possible yeah reminds me of the early days when computers just started having
vga and stuff and people would come out with amazing graphical what do they call them i can't
remember what they call them anyway i think i was thinking demos as well yeah i think that is what
they call them and you would we would download them off of bbs's and watch them or say wow it's
and my 486dx i can't believe it could do it it's so smooth yeah they were amazing right similar
deal with the terminals that the manufacturer of those devices back then um probably didn't have
um graphical animations or games in mind when they were building the those computers but then you got
some interested parties who were willing to like experiment and they actually managed to like
make it do things which the manufacturer just never intended the same thing with the terminal
um no one ever sat down and created a system to display 16.7 million colors at 60 frames
um a second um it was other people that just tried that and got it to work so there's an
amazing amount of um creativity and in freedom and working and stuff like that which i kind of
missed from the old days because now computers are so fast and so powerful now people don't have to
- They don't even worry about it, do they?
- Yeah.
- I think let's, I wanna kinda work through this.
You have this live demo, the official textual demo,
which you can install.
Let me go, I think I'm at the next, no.
So if I click on it, it tells me how to get it.
Props for the install step here, the uvx.
Are you a uv convert?
Are you a uv fan these days?
I am a fan. Yeah, I mean that I think is a killer app that you can send someone a fairly short command line and they can run your project.
The Python, it says --Python 3.12. That was because at the time it wouldn't install a version of Python that it could run on.
I think Astral's working on that.
So I think in the future, maybe now,
you could just do uvx, text-demo,
and then it would just run.
But even so, I think that's a beautiful way
of allowing people to test your code
with very little barriers.
Yeah, especially the script stuff now.
You can just hit the single script
and put the dependencies at the top
and just say, you know, uv run.
I can't remember exact syntax, but basically you can embed what it needs to run just as a comment.
That's excellent.
Yeah.
It's no harder than it needs to be, which is great.
It's very clear what it does.
It works very well.
It's the kind of computing that you want.
You don't want to have to send someone a page of instructions and say,
go and download this software and then write this into your configuration file.
That's just a headache.
I don't want to deal with that ever again.
I just want to send people a uvx, blah, and they're done.
I agree.
If you have uvx, you're good to go, right?
And you don't even have to have Python.
And you also don't have to worry about the version of Python.
So these are all good things.
So let's run it.
And let's see what happens here.
There's a lot going on in this demo.
Chris May out of the audience gives you props for making it so easy to run.
And Hugo says, I can drop the Python.
As you imagined, I can just say uvx textual demo,
and I'll probably get 13.1.
Let's see.
Something's happening.
I think it worked if you had that version of Python,
but if you didn't have the correct version of Python,
it would sometimes fail.
Got it.
Maybe they fixed it.
Maybe.
So when this thing pulls up, it looks very much like a web browser.
With the main difference, I think that there's not a lot of pictures, as in true graphics, right?
But if you imagine a really nicely styled website that maybe used color and emoji and CSS, but just light on graphics, right?
I feel like, what would you say?
Like that's kind of the extent?
It is.
It's kind of like a minimal web interface that focuses on typography.
I do want to point out.
I've got one font.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Exactly.
You can't.
Yeah.
But as we'll see, you can actually do graphics pretty well.
So.
Yeah.
If you see the numbers up at the top, there's nothing in the terminal.
Most people are saying so they won't know.
But at the top it says version, then it says 100,
GitHub stars 27.2 thousand, how many forks and so on.
But those are colored differently, they look different.
Okay, now tell us about the numbers.
- Yeah, sure, so they're taller and wider
than the rest of the text,
but there is no alternative font in the terminal.
Those numbers are made up of other characters,
box drawing characters.
So you've got like a vertical line, a horizontal line,
You've got a curved corner.
You've got like a T section and you can assemble that and make it display
something that looks like numbers.
Interesting.
Does look like.
It looks great.
You've got the little subscript for the thousands, the K, the kilo,
kilo stars, kilo stars.
Yeah.
It's a, if I remember correctly, it's a two by three, no, sorry,
three by three grid of characters.
And I had to hand edit this in Python by cut and pasting the box characters from Wikipedia
to assemble numbers.
And I discovered the numbers work quite well.
Numbers look like numbers.
And I've also got hex digits.
So I've got A, B, C, D, E, F. I tried to keep going, but I found that some characters didn't
work at all.
Like an X.
There's no diagonal cross piece in these Unicode characters.
So an X just became impossible with a 3x3 grid.
But for numbers, it works beautifully.
Yeah, very interesting.
A little bit like a classical alarm clock where the numbers...
Like a seven-digit display, yeah.
Yes, exactly.
Yeah, very similar.
Cool.
All right, so if you run the demo,
it comes up with comments that show you
or sort of a walkthrough of what's possible in these little boxes.
And it says, look, you can go, you can scroll it.
You can scroll it with your mouse.
It scrolls that section.
It says, you want to go to the next one?
Hit tab, hit enter to open it up.
It's even though, kind of like we were talking,
even though it's a user interface,
like with scroll bars and I can grab the scroll bar
and go to it and I can click on the things and so on.
It's also very keyboard friendly.
This is probably a super important aspect of building these types of applications in the terminal because people expect that, right?
Yeah, very much so.
So a lot of textual was inspired by web development because I was a web developer for many years.
And there's a lot of work being done in interfaces in the web world.
Lots of work, you know, loads of developers working on it for years.
I want to bring some of that to the terminal, but I also didn't want to lose what made the terminal interesting.
Terminal is a very keyboard focused thing, so I wanted textual apps to also be very keyboard
focused.
The mouse is terrific for discovering things, you know, you can move it around and there's
tool tips etc.
You can click those links or you can press the key.
But if you want to use an app regularly you'll want to learn the keys, so it is very focused.
You can use the keyboard for everything.
In the footer, that displays all the main keys.
You can also use tab and shift tab to move around the various elements.
You can use it up, down to scroll.
So you could get by without ever using the mouse.
It's there if you need it, but you don't have to.
Yeah, that's incredible.
It's got code highlighting.
It's got a lot of different things.
For people who maybe want to get started with this,
I think there's two, well, let's say three.
Three things that are worth looking at.
One, you actually, you said you were a web developer,
so you must have been a fan of Vue Source, right?
Oh, yeah.
So you basically added Vue Source.
That's right, yeah.
You type C, it says so at the bottom,
and that pulls up the source of the current page
like you would at my website, any website, right?
Yeah, I want people to realize that the code behind it is not that complex.
It looks like complex.
What you're viewing at the moment is actually markdown,
which you might think that's quite hard to render markdown in a terminal.
Well, it is, but we've done it for you.
So you just embed a widget and somewhere in the code it'll say yield markdown
and then it'll have the contents
and it renders marked out
and you see there's a code block there
with syntax highlight code.
Yeah, well that's the magic of these libraries, right?
It's hard once for you
and then it's easy for other people.
Yeah, we suffer so you don't have to.
Exactly.
I feel like the most,
the biggest example of that in the Python space
is Jupyter Notebooks, right?
All that interactivity and all that stuff,
people are writing TypeScript and JavaScript
and all these kinds of things, you know, it's for, you know, Plotly and other plotting UI
things. And that's so Python people can write Python code and not write, you know, they're
not creating websites. They're just typing in a notebook and they get interactive things.
Right. But yeah, that's probably the biggest take one for the team sort of deal.
Yeah. So there's a lot of work under the hood. And a lot of people that use Jupyter Notebooks,
that's the only knowledge of Python they think Python is Jupyter and Jupyter is
Python and that's fine it's a tool and it gives them access to all this stuff
which would be very hard otherwise so yeah I think Jupyter is a great example
of that out in the audience and we have David points out JP term are you from
jpterm yes it's that david brokert yeah yeah yeah the successor of mbterm and it's um jupiter
jupiter lab in the terminal amazing yeah it's gone full circle um it's like the inception movie
it really is right yeah but you can embed the textual app inside jupiter
So you could have Jterm working in a textual app inside Jupyter that's also displaying another notebook.
Yeah.
Incredible.
All right.
So if we go to the terminal where I got this running and anyone else out there listening wants to check this out, just run it.
And I was starting to say there's three places you should check out before I got kind of starstruck with a view code.
okay so i think there's probably the best place to get started is to look at the widgets i don't
know what you think but just like well what can this framework do in terms of what are the building
blocks is that you can look at the widgets and then once you decide okay this is pretty interesting
i think people should check out the projects because there are some pretty interesting
things i know we've covered the mom python bytes that are built on top of textual and then just to
talk about the graphics. What is this game? This is a game in inverted commas. It's got different
names. Sliding tile puzzle, I think is the most common thing. You've probably seen it before.
You've got a square. The square is made up of lots of little tiles and there's one space and you can
move a square into that one space and the goal is to like reassemble the image but for here
I've used code so you've got all these tiles with code on it you got to reassemble it into
actual working code which I think is what most people think developers do this is how we make
code just by sliding these tiles around yeah I remember one of my daughters I can't remember
which one was like saw me typing out code.
What are you doing?
What is that?
Work on this project, this program, this website.
That's what websites look like.
Okay.
Yeah.
My wife calls it the gibberish.
She says, are you working on the gibberish?
Yeah, I am.
Yes.
That's incredible.
That's an amazing way to put it.
Yeah.
You know, I was just thinking the other day,
like the incredible power of text.
right you think of all these systems the internet Linux configuration source code
design through c all of that is just words right it's not working with guis and all that stuff it's
just typing taxes yeah very important i quite like um websites that skew graphics and have
just kind of like typography based thing um i find you can easily more easily extract
information you need. But most websites these days you go to and
loads of ads, loads of image, they pop in and out.
The text seems almost secondary.
So I'm a big fan of just text in general.
Yeah, same. Alright, so people can play the game.
That's kind of interesting. Like I said, I think where maybe it's more
interesting is talking about the widgets. And when I look at this,
You know, what this reminds me of is it reminds me of if I were to go over here and type Bulma and go, which Bulma is a very refreshing CSS framework that doesn't require build tools and shaking and webpack and all that junk.
Or like Tailwind, or Tailwind is kind of a pain to work with, but it's also super beautiful, right?
When I look at this, the widgets, it feels very much similar to that, right?
I'm sure people have checked out CSS frameworks.
Yeah, tell us about it.
Yeah, so I mean, again, coming from the web, I want to have a web-like experience.
Because everybody's familiar with the web.
It's like you can sit someone down on a website and they'll be able to use it.
I wanted the same thing for terminal apps.
Some terminal apps have a bad reputation,
have been hard to use, and it's mostly deserved.
Like, you know, how do you quit Vim?
It's a running joke.
I know how to quit Vim.
You reboot your computer.
Everybody knows that.
Come on.
Exactly.
But I wanted, like, an interface
that people were very, very familiar with.
So this is actually an alphabetical order,
but I think buttons was actually
one of the first things I developed.
Because the terminal doesn't give you anything for free.
The terminal is just text with escape sequences for color and style, like italic, bold, etc.
But there's no escape sequence for a button.
The most simplest atomic user interface thing.
A button with a bit of text that you click.
There's nothing in the terminal spec for that.
So you have to start from scratch.
And we built this button that looks button-y.
It even has a 3D raised effect and stuff.
Yes, there's like a lighter color at the top and a dark color at the bottom.
And it looks like a classic windows raised button.
Imagine if this light is like coming
from the top and illuminating the top edge.
Some people don't don't like them.
I think one of the reasons is it has to take up three characters.
In order to get that effect, you have to take up three lines.
I see.
It creates quite a chunky button.
Looks like a button, but it's chunky.
But you can style it very trivially to be like one line long.
So your button can just be as tall as it needs to be.
Nice.
Yeah, these are great.
And we've got other things.
I was thinking as you were talking about the primitives you have to work with,
I was thinking of pretty much every 3D rendered thing that people see,
video games and others as well, animations.
They're just triangles.
There's just a bunch of triangles, which is so insane that you think that thing that looks like a real forest.
Every single thing on the screen is some weird triangle with a texture and stuff applied to it.
But a lot of triangles.
Yeah.
Lots.
You can't think too hard about how fast things are happening on graphics cards because your mind will melt.
It's like there's so much going on.
You've got check boxes.
Are they all?
Radio buttons.
Yeah.
Radio buttons, which are great.
A lot of the things that people might think about data tables, you know, this is if you're doing data science.
I think one of the things worth talking about, because when we talk about some of the performance things, there's a lot of this within that within that.
Right. Like in your data table. So this whole UI, I can scroll up and down and see all the different widgets.
But then when I get to the data table section, I can scroll horizontally and vertically within the data table itself.
right yeah you can also press um control a and that'll maximize it
oh yeah very cool i didn't even know about that yeah this is a nice feature um which i think
websites should have and guis in general um i remember windows used to suffer from this you'd
get like a dialogue we had to enter a lot of text but the dialogue was this size um and you weren't
allowed to resize it.
You can't resize it.
You tap over and hope you hit the right button
that you can't see.
Yeah.
So I added
a shortcut key
which can maximize anything
which is focused, make it,
resize it to the size of the screen.
Nice.
Okay.
In the interest of time,
let's go and talk about projects real quick.
I think one of the things
that probably can inspire people
lot is some of these projects here.
If you go to the project section, you've got a couple that are super nice here.
For example, I would say this posting I know by Darren Burns, it's pretty, pretty interesting.
This is like Postman, right?
Like a HTTP client, but entirely in your terminal.
Let's tell people about this.
This is great.
Yeah.
This is something that Darren Burns built and he's a developer of Textual, one of the developers,
and he made a fantastic job of this. This is not a textualized project.
But basically it's Postman, which is a tool for making HTTP requests. You might use it if you're
developing an API and you want to experiment and you don't want to have to build all the tooling
to talk to your API. You can just go straight into this interface and experiment and play around with
Yeah, I did that two days ago.
Yeah, and it's super useful.
And the fact that it's in the terminal is completely appropriate for this kind of application because that's where you're going to be a lot of the time.
It just seems to be the right place.
If you have your app in a browser, it can take you out of your flow if you're developing and then having to switch over a window.
But having it all on the terminal is super useful.
And this project has sort of grown in feature set,
and I think it's comparable to some much, much larger projects,
including Postman.
Yeah, nice.
And open source, right?
Open source, yeah.
Yeah, cool.
What other ones do you want to give a quick shout out to?
Well, yeah, we'll go through them there.
We've got Memory that was written by Bloomberg.
They were an early adopter of Textual.
And it's kind of a memory profiler,
so it can run your Python application
and it can pinpoint exactly what's taken up too much memory.
Or if you've got a leak, you know,
you're in a loop and you're reserving objects,
you don't know about it, it can alert you to that,
which is very hard to actually debug
without any kind of tool.
So that's a fantastic project.
- Yeah, I had them on not too long ago to talk about it.
And yeah, this is a super cool project.
I think also just graphically, it's pretty neat, right?
Yeah.
It displays all the information that you need right there in the terminal in a nice way.
I mean, I can imagine a previous version of something like this, writing out a big spew of JSON, which you then got to study to figure out.
We've saved a CSV file.
Now you can look at it.
It's like, oh, great.
Yeah, exactly.
But if you can look at it in a graphical form
and a nice table,
you can visually parse information much quicker
so you can pinpoint things.
Yeah, we talked a little bit around this,
but another huge benefit of these types of UIs
with Textual is the ability to run them remotely on servers
and other or on a raspberry pi or on things that you that are embedded types of stuff that you just
only access through the terminal right like if you wanted to do memory on your your web server
you probably don't want to just open up a bunch of ports and start serving you know a parallel
http request over there's right but if you sshn and you just run this gui that's updating it's
really nice right yeah exactly this is um you don't even need to have a desktop you don't need
to run a server and like you said you don't need to like set your firewall to allow a particular
port and then configure application all that's gone because it's a text on the face you just need to
have a shell ssh into the server and then run it and you can see this nice interface
there because it is just purely text and there's not much text involved you'd be surprised um
The text needs to be sent over the wire is surprisingly minimal.
If you compared it to a YouTube video of the lowest quality,
I don't know what the lowest quality is, like 120p or something.
Yeah, 360 by 240 or something.
Who knows?
Yeah, that would be vastly more data than a text interface like this.
Yeah, even if it's madly updating, yeah.
I mean, you could actually.
You could if you want to push it.
Like if I was to run this ridiculous demo
with a spinning gradient at 60 frames a second
and setting the screen size to ridiculous,
it might turn into a video, but for most interfaces.
- But is it, it's probably applicable
for like Gzip transfer as well, you know,
text compresses really well, I don't know.
- True, true.
It depends what you're rendering.
- I don't know SSH does, I don't know, maybe it does.
I would think it compresses.
Compresses and encrypts.
Yeah, I would hope so.
But yeah.
Yeah, well, compression should be cheaper than the encryption.
So yeah, why not go ahead and compress it while you're at it, right?
Exactly, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay.
So somewhere in here, we've pulled up so many things.
I pulled up your article that I wanted to talk about as well.
So let's talk about this.
This was your, you said you wanted to write an article,
would sort of celebrate the 1.0 milestone for Textual.
And the article was called Algorithms
for High Performance Terminal Apps.
And I thought there was just some fun things
to pull out of here.
So I thought we could maybe talk through some of that.
Yeah, sure.
So there's lots of interesting technical problems
to solve with Textual.
And lots of cool solutions.
And by so far, I rarely have the chance
to talk to anyone about it.
because it's one of these things that's kind of under the hood, it just works.
Yeah.
There's nothing to discuss.
So I wrote this blog post to describe some of the cool things that go on.
The most core part of Textual is the compositor.
This takes all the widgets.
If you've got an interface, it might have data table, button, checkboxes.
And there might be loads of those and it might be able to scroll through it.
And Textual has to take all those widgets and assemble them into a single update.
Because there's nothing in the terminal that does a kind of a tiling window manager.
You just write text to the terminal.
So the software has to create this illusion that you've got windows and things that are
overlapping.
And that's essentially what the compositor does.
That's great.
And you've got transparency.
sort of oh my goodness yeah it's kind of magical it's like it shouldn't be possible in terminal
no it should not be possible it cheats um you're not you're not seeing true
uh transparency because the terminal is not capable of it you can't put like um
an x on top of an a and then see the x translucently with it in with the a in the background
but you can change background colors.
So if you put something on top of background,
you can calculate the transparency on top of the widget underneath it.
So you can create the illusion of background of transparency.
And that's something that the compositor does as well.
Yeah. Is textual pure Python?
Pure Python, yeah.
Wow.
I had thought that at some point we would have to write something in Rust.
I bought a couple of Rust books, which I haven't read yet.
But every time I got to a point where this is a bit too slow,
I found a very good optimization in Python.
So it turns out that it's just not necessary.
I mean, if we were to write some core code in Rust,
I don't think we'd get a marvelous speed up.
we might get 5%, 10% if we're lucky for a lot of effort.
But since it runs on a lowly Raspberry Pi,
it's not been necessary.
Python's been more than fast enough.
Yeah.
And you can just ride on the coattails of the faster CPython team.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, yeah.
That helps.
A new version comes along, we can say Textual just got 10% faster.
Textual has some sort of concurrency framework too, right?
Yeah.
So it's based on async.io and every widget from a button to a text area to a checkbox runs an async.io task.
So all these things are running concurrently, potentially updating the state.
And Textual will update things according to the schedule of the widgets.
You might have a widget which updates 10 times a second.
another widget which updates when you press a key,
another widget which updates infrequently,
and Textile will combine those updates into a single update
so that it looks clean, it doesn't flicker,
and it's what does the magic of updating things.
Yeah, awesome.
That's super neat.
I think UI frameworks and AsyncIO, Async and await, they make a lot of sense, right?
It's event-driven stuff.
And so you can, instead of pulling or whatever, you just say, I'm going to wait till this thing has some kind of event.
And then I'll work on it.
And if that doesn't have an event, I'm going to go work on something else.
Yeah, it's pretty cool.
Yeah, exactly.
It's funny that AsyncIO was obviously, you can tell by the name, it wasn't intended to build user interfaces, whether in the terminal or not.
it was built for I/O but it's very good at handling concurrency of any kind and
including text user interfaces. I'm a big fan of async I/O it's not it's not
perfect there are a bunch of gotchas which come up in our support channels
for instance someone will be playing around with textual and they'll say well
I'm going to need some long-running tasks so I'll simulate this by putting a
sleep pin we'll do like sleep 10 and then the whole app just locks up i can't believe exactly
exactly so it's not it's not perfect but there is no perfect solution to concurrency um but i think
you know it's it's as good as it can be with the current level of technology i think yeah yeah yeah
very neat free threaded python have you played with this is it going to influence that kind of thing
I think so. There's a whole lot of cool things that free-threaded Python can do. We've kind of
convinced ourselves that we didn't need that kind of level of concurrency, you know, for like a web
application or something, because it's linear. And the IO gives you concurrency in a sense,
because you're waiting for the IO. But I think free-threaded Python, I think we need a better
abstraction for concurrency because having to explicitly create a thread and run it requires
that you think in terms of threads which is quite challenging yeah I think it should be
it should be the same as async.io it should be async and await and there should be some item
marriage between them where like you don't really know as you're consuming it you know
Yeah, unfortunately, async.io is single threaded.
You can use multiple threads, but you've got to consciously write the code.
I would like to see an async.io where it just distributed work across the cores.
If it's IO based, just keep it on the same thread.
But if it's computational based, then like you're going to just put it on another thread
and give me a future sort of thing to await.
Yeah, we don't care.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah. So I think in the future, we're probably going to get something like that because I think free-threaded Python is so valuable that people are going to want to use it more.
And they're going to build these better abstractions.
So I imagine in a year or two, maybe less, we'll have an asyncio that's free-threaded or something like it.
Yeah. We say that we don't need it for web apps because we can just scale them out, right?
We'll just run four of them, four worker processes.
But there's a big memory cost to running.
Well, I've got 16 cores, so I'm going to run 16 worker processes, right?
They each take half a gig.
All of a sudden, you're like, it gigs just for this.
Just so I can get computational parallelism, right?
Yeah.
Exactly.
I mean, yeah, the IO gets you a lot of the way there,
but sometimes you accidentally create CPU bound code.
which would run very
poorly but if we had
if we were using all our threads efficiently then
that should be easier
it should be easier yeah
you know it's super easy
like oh I've got an ORM
and I'm going to return
20,000 things that I'm
parsing into Pydantic objects for Fast
API all of a sudden like the most of the work
is the serialization that's computational
anyway alright so
let's get back to this but I think that's super
super interesting we could we could do a whole another hour on that probably so one of the things
in here you talked about is thinking in segments and not uh not characters or stuff for drawing um
terminal so let's talk about that because i really want to talk about the switching the primitive
idea you got but i think this is a good setup yeah sure um so people who aren't familiar with inner
workings of terminals might look at terminal um and think it's like a two-dimensional array of
characters because it does it does seem like that and if you're building a text lab you might think
so you could compose a screen full of text and like a bitmap as if the characters were
were pixels and as developers that'd be like um stuff we're very familiar with we could easily
build that and you know create stuff with it and but the problem is that term terminals aren't
two-dimensional arrays of characters and it's for one reason is that some characters take up
twice as much space as others um chinese japanese and korean tags typically take up two characters
because their characters are more complex they deliver more information in a single character
so they have to be wider um there's also emoji which many emojis can take up twice as much space
um i'd have the snake the snake emoji exactly um i think that yeah that might be two um i don't know
how wide it is so some emoji are one like a smiley face or something but some emoji are two
and if you were to treat it like a like a two-dimensional ray um it kind of falls apart
at that point because um you know if you subtract one from the y coordinate it's not directly above
um the original coordinate so in situations like that rather than trying to fudge things into like
into the primitive that you first thought of you can come up with a new primitive a new way that
represents um the very lowest common denominator of thing you want to do and for textual that turned
out to be segments um so rather than a characters like a pixel um we use a segment a segment is
a string, any number of characters, plus a style.
And by assembling these segments,
you can represent anything in the UI.
And all the operations which are done
are kind of built on segments.
So I call this switching the primitive
because the original primitive was like a character's a pixel,
which didn't work.
You could use that with a bunch of fudges
to build on top of it.
but you might find that it falls apart.
Things which should be straightforward
suddenly become really complicated.
And that's because as developers we tend to layer primitives
on top of other operations
and if the very foundational primitive
doesn't represent your problem very well
then it can fall apart.
So the switch from pixels to segments worked very well with textual
and textual is essentially a segment processing engine.
everything the compositor does takes in a bunch of segments,
manipulates them, spits out new segments,
and then those get turned into escape sequences.
Yeah, very cool.
I think this idea of switching the primitive,
you know, people who are new to programming or new to Python,
especially programming, I have a hard time.
I see the code.
I look at someone else's code, and I see the code,
and it makes sense.
but then when i sit down with a blank screen and try to solve a problem i'm stuck i don't know what
to do and this the switching the primitive concept of like we looked at it this way and it just seemed
so complicated and tractable and then i decided to re rejigger maybe the data structures and how
we organize stuff and how we combine them and boom it just unlocks simplicity actually like
kind of like going back to our triangles and graphics it's like well if you think in pixels
3d game engines are impossible with ray tracing and lighting and shadows you think in triangles
all of a sudden it unlocks it right this sounds a little bit similar and i think i think that's a
pretty valuable lesson for people to take that's exactly right so if you had um a game engine and
all the only function it had was like put pixel um it would be a nightmare to build anything but
the most trivial games but the um the primitive of a triangle means you can build 3d anything so that
is the primitive yeah and they have angles so they have reflection and so they have all sorts of stuff
yeah yeah um something similar came up when um darren was building the text area um so the text
area has lots of operations like um insert a new line um delete a character um delete a line
delete a paragraph, cut and paste, etc.
And the primitive for that boiled down to a very, very simple primitive,
and that was replace a range of text with new text.
It's like anything you can do to a text area
comes down to that primitive of a range plus new text.
Like to delete something, you replace a range with an empty string.
To insert something, you replace a range with the insertion character,
like a like a new line plus the previous string so everything boils down to like one very simple
primitive and once you find the right primitive bigger problems become much much easier yeah
100 it's it's amazing the way it works so we'll get short on time we got pick one more one more
lesson from here that you want to i want to talk about maybe um the spatial map was quite interesting
Yeah, I think so too.
A bit further down.
So one of the problems we had in textual, when interfaces get complex, we've got lots and lots of widgets.
Some of them are visible and some of them are not. Some of them are scrolled off.
They're still there in memory. We know exactly where they are.
And when we come to render that, the most obvious way to do that is to step through them in a for loop,
for widgets in all widgets, do stuff to widget.
So that means we're iterating over all the widgets every single time, even if they aren't visible.
So the spatial map is an attempt to optimize that.
Basically it's a very quick way of deciding which the widgets are on screen and which the widgets are currently scrolled off.
So we literally don't need to even loop through the scrolled off widgets.
And the way we did that briefly is we kind of logically separated the terminal into a grid.
There's a step where you go through and assign every widget to the grid squares that it might overlap with.
Small widgets might be right inside a grid square.
Some may overlap one or two or more.
And then once we've got that information, it's very easy to pick out which widgets are visible
and exclude which widgets aren't.
Because we can take the screen, figure out which of the grid squares it covers, and then
we can go through those grid squares, and there's probably just a handful of them, and
each of those grid squares is associated with a list of widgets which are under that.
You can combine that with a set, and then very quickly you've reduced that problem domain
from being potentially unbounded very large to like very small.
Some of the widgets might actually not be visible.
They might actually be in a grid square,
which is off the edge of the screen.
But we can just loop through those and discard those ones.
But that's a much smaller operation
than looping through every widget.
Yeah, interesting.
You talked about it's fast enough in Python.
It's this kind of stuff that makes it fast enough in Python, right?
If you rewrote this in some other native compiled language,
it would be faster to go through every single one of them,
but you're still potentially processing a tremendous number of things.
You get the compositor and overlap and all those kinds of,
and you're like really worried about stuff that's way off the screen.
Instead of going, we're going to rewrite it.
You can just think like,
let me think about the right data structures and the right algorithms and so on.
Yeah.
I mean, I would love it if Python just got so ridiculously fast.
You'd have to worry about that.
and I'll take any speed improvements to give.
But the optimizations you can produce yourself
just by having the right algorithm,
they tend to outweigh the benefits you could get
from say running it in C.
If I was to re-implement that in C,
it would obviously be faster,
but it would still be much faster to have that algorithm.
- Yeah, exactly.
I'll take my order of O squared versus your,
in fact, your O factorial versus N squared.
You know what I mean?
- Yeah.
- Eventually it's gonna lose on N factorial
no matter what you do, right?
- Yeah, I mean, Python wins
because of the speed of development.
We know it's not the runtime speed.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- The runtime speed is okay most of the time,
but it's the speed of development,
the fact that you have got more time
to pick the right algorithm.
- Yeah.
- That means it's not as slow as people might think.
- Yeah, absolutely.
It doesn't get too complicated.
Yeah, thinking about this, you know, I think there's a lot of parallels back to game engines that I think about a lot.
Like the game engines have this thing called oct trees, like basically break stuff into eight squares.
And you say, well, which I'm looking for a thing if it's going to say intersect with this.
Right. For business, like for hit detection and stuff like, well, is it in this half of this world or that half?
Well, it's in this half. OK, well, we're not even going to compare it against half of the things in the world that are in that half.
Now, break that into hash, right?
Like you can super quickly go, I have a million objects on screen,
but I can determine if this thing hits it with five comparisons
or something like that, you know what I mean?
With just the right data.
That's exactly it.
It's super interesting.
Yeah.
And it's probably, it's like no coincidence that I used to work in video games.
Oh, did you?
Okay.
Yeah.
So that was kind of my mindset.
It's like reducing the problem.
And Textile is quite a lot like a video game.
If you imagine like a 2D video game
that's got lots of sprites that are over here,
we don't want to worry about those.
- Yeah.
- Replace sprites with widgets,
and it's pretty much the same problem.
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
- It's the same kind of mindset.
- It certainly is.
All right, well, I think we're gonna need
to just kind of wrap it up here,
'cause I think we're getting short on time.
Let's leave everyone with roadmap.
Where, you know, you've hit this 1.0 milestone
with textual, where are things going?
So there's a whole bunch of features which I want to implement.
I mean, text is usable as, now you can build fantastic apps, but there are a few things
where we don't have parity with web apps.
Something I've implemented on a feature branch is arbitrary text selection.
So you know on a website you can just draw your mouse over text you want to select.
That didn't work well with 2e's.
If the terminal did it, the terminal doesn't understand the logical separation of widgets.
It would just copy all the text on that line, which might get parts of one widget and parts
of another.
So I've implemented arbitrary text selection, which seems to work quite well.
And it's such a fundamental feature, I think it'll make textual more useful.
Yeah, I guess if you got a UI in textual and you're like, I need to get that and paste
into another document or search it you know highlight the map the address to put in a map
or something right yeah and things like um you know if you're using textual to talk to an llm
an llm write some code um you don't want to transcribe that code visually um yeah and so now
we could be able to like we can select the entire code you could add a button but it's very convenient
to drag.
So that's something that's coming very soon.
Awesome.
And yeah, there's a whole bunch of features I've got,
which I'll be working on.
Yeah, watch this space.
Excellent.
And PRs accepted?
Contributions accepted?
Very much so, yep.
There's a big pile of them there,
but I tend to work on a big feature.
I then spend a few days going through the PRs.
And I love to have PRs.
that means that people are very interested.
And it saves me time, of course.
If someone else is fixing bugs and writing code,
then it's a great thing.
- Awesome.
All right, well, thanks for coming on,
giving us an update on Textual
and all the stuff that you guys built.
It's super valuable to people.
- Always a pleasure, thank you very much.
- Yeah, you bet.
See you later.
- Bye-bye.